Januray 11th 2023:

  Pay attention to the specific terms used in questions asked in this class
  some questions may be trying to trick you

  Greenhouse Effect:
    First defined in the 19th century:
      First by Joseph Fourier

      Eunice foot and John Tyndall also contributed to research

      lastly, svante Arrhenius put together everything

    The wavelength of radiation emitted by a body depends of the 
    temperature of that body.

    Hotter - shorter wavelength 
    Cooler - Long wavelength

    As a flame gets warmer, the light turns to cooler colors

    The sun emits short wavelength radiation
    the earth emits long wavelength radiation

    most of UV from the sun and space is being absorbed by the ozone layer

    UV is too high in energy, so it is therefore harmful to living organisms

    Earth is trying to release infared energy, trying to cool itself down, but greenhouse gases
    trap in this heat, which keeps the earth warm in temperature.

    SW radiation from Sun absorbed by earth

    Emitted back from earth as LW radiation

    Greenhouse Gases: mostly transparent to incoming SW radiation

    HOWEVER, GHG's strongly absorb outgoing LW radiation emitted by Earth

    Decrease GHG concetration, absorb less outoging LW radiation - planet cools
    (because we're releasing less heat)

    Result: Earth's surgace is ~55 Degrees F (31C) warmer with atmospheric
    GHGs than without

    isotopes: atoms with identical chemical, but different mass

    atmospheric co2 has become more negative (light), so we know that 
    the increase in CO2 is from burning of fossil fuels, not from other
    sources like volcanic activity.


January 13 2023:
  Earth System Science:

    System - Set of components that interact with one another to operate as a single entity
    Analogy - human body (heart, lungs, brain)

    Change in one component - will affect one or more of other components in some way 

    Result: entire system changes

    Examples (biosphere, hydrosphere, cryosphere)

    Five compnents of Earth System: 

    solid earth (lithosphere, mantle, core)
    atmosphere
    hydrosphere
    cryosphere
    biosphere.......

  Two major engines of change (regarding greenhouse effect):
    Solar radiation (solar panel on the surface)
    Geo thermal heat (nuclear reactor in the core)


  Energy drives change through convection: transfer of energy, causing motion

  Concvection within solid earth heat supplied from radioactivity

  incoming solar radiation unevenly distributed more energy at equator than poles
  (Less sunlight in areas other than equator, because you're absorbing more sunlight over larger amount of area)
  (Equator is like directly getting hit by the sunlight, so its warmer. The poles are gonna be colder, causing atmosphere)

  atmosphere circulation transfers warm air from the tropics to areas where there are an energy deficit

  Convection in the ocean:
    Dense water sinks, forms deep water...

  Water is being transferred in the tropics to the poles, so the water is being cooled very rapidly - become more dense and sinks

  The oceanic transports heat from the low latitudes to the high latitudes
  ......

  System compnents interact - feedbacks

  Two major feedbacks: (just like in ib bio)
    Positive (changes your equilibrium)
    Negative (brings you back to equilibrium)

    positive feedbacks will amplify the effect of something in a system (for example, the albedo effect)

  more sea ice - more reflection 
  less sea ice - more absorbtion of sea ice

  Currently, there is a reduction in the cryosphere (albedo effect) (bad for the fucking polar bear - best bears god damn)

  2016 reached a record low global sea ice extent 

  The reduction of albedo effect is the main driving force for polar amplifciation

Example of a negative feedback loop that is combatting against reduction in albedo effect: 

  Increased evaporation and cloud formation -> more solar radiation - reduced warming

  Warming from climate change with feedbacks:
    is a lot larger due to positive feedback loops

January 18th 2023:
  
  Geologic time:
    immense length of time over which large global changes have occured

    Where it started:
      Universe started with the big bang 13.7 billion years ago - earth is 4.6 billion years ago

    Where did all the elements come from?

    Just after the big bang, we tons of helium and hydrogen everywhere
    
    Heavy elements are produced inside starts by ----nuclear fusion----:

      Our sun : He -> H = asjdfadfasdf

      iron and nickle heaviest elements produced


      Big bang mostly hydrogen some helium, but most helium was overshadowed by helium produced by nuclear fusion 

    Closest observed supernova:
      Supernova 1987A

    other supernova: Crab nebula 1054AD supernova explosion

    is betelgeuse next? (next star to go supernova)

  Elements come from:
    Big bang - light elements
    Fusion in stars 
    Super nova explosions -- iron and nickle
    Remaining elements are only made in the laboratory

  Why there is so much iron and nickle:
    Hydrogen, carbon, oxygen, and helium all burn until everything turns into iron and nickle

  Geologic time:
    How do we measure time?
    How old is the earth?

    In 1785, James Hutton pioneered the concept of geologic time

  Uniformtarianism "the present is the key to the past"
                    Processes operating at same rates today as in the past - Geologic Time

  Carbon dating - Measure time with radioactive isotopoes (same number of protons, differing number of neutrons)

  Stable isotopes do not decay over time 
  radioactive isotopes decay

  Radioactive decay:
    Parent isotope --> daughter isotope

    Rate of decay - described by half life:
      Time required for 50% of parent to decay from previous value (100% to 50% to 25% to 12.5%)

    Looking at the decay rate of the daughter isotope we can find find the age of that isotope

    Different "clocks" for each elements (each element tells you how old it is, thus, different clocks or records of time)

  Oldest Known mineral on earth:
    4.4 billion years ago

  We can also measure time by dating meteorites:
    oldest meteorite formed at the same time as earth 4.5662 billion years ago

January 20 2023:
  Date meterorites formed - once again, same time as earth formed

  Four topics today: A. Origin of the solar system

  The sun: 
    plasma made up of H and He 

    inner planets: clostest to sun classified as "rocky" plants
                    (Si, O, Mg, Fe)

    outer plants: further from sun -> gas planets (mostly H and He)

    Why this distribution of plants

    Nebula hypothesis:
      Started as cloud of interstellar gas

      1. Cloud - contracted under their own weight
          (clouds of more weight will begin to pull more things given its gravity)
          (This pulling force causing angular momentum)

      2. Forms solar nebula:
          A flat, rotating disk with matter concetrated at the center that will 
          become the proto-sun

      3. Condensation in disk surrounding protosun 

      4. Accretion - gas and dust forms grains collide and clump together
          into larger chunks (planetesimals)
          (terrestrial planets grew by accretion of planetismals)

    Formation of the moon:
     1. Theia collided with infant Earth
     2. Debris from collision into orbit 
     3. Debris from collision collapses into orbiting disk 
     4. Debris accretes to form moon 

     Age of earth: 4.56 

     Oldest rocks on moon: 4.51 

     Moon thus formed shortly after earth 

     Late Heavy bombardment:
      Cratering of the moon's rufaces indicate planets sweeping up 
      remaining debris (accumulation)

    Last step in origin of the solid earth - planetary differentiation
      distribution of elements within a planet is roughly the same 
      everywhere 

    (1) After initial formation interior heats up from:
      - radioactive heats
      -impacts

    (2) Heavy elements melt and sink, lighter elements rise

    (3) Differentiate plants into lithosphere, mantle, core


  January 23 2023:
    La nina
    ....

    el nino 
    .....


    The origin of life:
      Abiogensis (chemical evolution):
        The idea that life evolved spontaneously from inorganic/inanimate compound through self-organization

        "Life was thus an almost utterly improbable event with almost infinte oppurtunities of happening. So it did"

        Started with primordial chemical diversity
          - polymers
          - chiral selection 
          - self organization 
          - prokaryote 
          - eukaryote


        85% of life's history left no direct record

        oldest fossiles:
          0.54 Ga 
        Oldest evidence of microbial life:
          3.5 Ga Strotomalites

        How did life begin?

          The outcome of life right now:
            (all life on earth started from one blueprint)
            - is Cellular
            - Same groups of molecules
            - Same chemistry

          Same molecules:
            Carbon is the basis on all life on earth (organic if it contains carbons)
            Also H, N, O, P, and S

            Amino acids:
              building blocks of protein
              Organic compounds 
              universal component for living things -> This unity suggests one common ancestor

              Two types:
                L amino acid, D amino acid 

                chemically identical but mirror images of each other structurally

                Life exclusively uses the L amino acid
                 (we dont understand this yet)

                L amino acids could turn in D amino acids and vise versa (what the fuck)

                Miller urey experiment (primordial fluid):
                  (Kinda unrelated but there was no oxygen in this environment)

                  - They tried to simulate early earth and fed in foundational chemical molecules
                  - Over 20 different amino acids formed 

                Self assembled cellular containers or "proto-cell"
                phopholipid bilayer formed!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

            Same chemistry:
              Enzyme -> acts as a catalyst for chemical reactions (speeds up reaction... I already know this)

              2018: Nobel prize in chemistry 
                    For this person's work on "directed evolution of enzymes"

                    ....ALL design is evolutionary

          So where did life begin....
            1. primordial life 
            2. hydrothermal vents
            3. panspermia

          (1) - Primordia Soup:
            - all these building blocks.. methane, ammonia phosphoric salts 
            - extremeophiles

          (2) Deep sea Hydrothermal vents (Black smokers):
                - These vents create complex ecosystems around them 
                  (all you need is energy from heat and chemical energy)

          (3) - life orginated from SPACE ????????? ALIENSSSSSS 

              2500 years of panspermia hypthesis:
                500 BC seed of life 
                ...

              some meteorites have a dominant amount of L amino acids

              Life originated from another planet? Could life also arrive on other planets?

              The "rogue" martian meteorites
                Electron microscope showed signs of microbial life (a martian!!)

                Life elsewhere in the universe is not constrained to one origin 
                  - could be panspermia, primordial soup, idk


January 25th 2023:
  Phanerozoic: Visible life 

  Proterozoic 
    Earlier life 

  Precrambian:
    Cenozoic : "young life" 

    Mesozoic: "middle life" 

    Paleozoic: "old Life"

    Precrambian

  Life first diversified into eukaryote and prokaryotes
    prokarytes take the majority of the living life here in numbers

    prokaryotes (don't have a nucleus, literally just IB Bio)

    Eukaryotes: have a nucleus

    How Eukaryotes evolved to be that way:
      Endosymbiotic theory 

      Two prokaryotes: one eats the other but doesnt destroy it. the other one lives in the other and they both thrive
      somehow 

      Strotomalites are fossiles of single celled organisms in 3.5Ga rocks

      likely that life on earth formed 3.8Ga~ ??


      Carbon 12 is mostly abundant

      Carbon 13 is not as abundant


    Evidence of first life is not based on fossils, rather based on isoptopically light carbon in graphite
      inorganic carbon: around 0%

    Cambrian explosion 
    1. Rapid increase in diversity 
    2. Capabillity to make hard shells


January 27th 2023:

  microbial life:
    How to microbiologists study microbes?:
      microbiologists are faced with making a microscopic obesrvation of something extremely small

      Use molecular signatures to study microbial diversity:

      Central dogma of molecular biology
        DNA makes RNA makes protein

      This one scientist's algorithm was able to group human literature, each literature had its own genre assigned to it.
      The same scientist used this system to group proteins

      Life as we know it; mostly microbial

      Life requires thermodynamic disequilibria in the environment to get and 
      store energy 

      life harvests chemical energy by coupling favorable pairs of oxidation and reduction half-reactions and uses 
      energy to do work (they use ATP as the currency)

      Notice how the equation is the reverse of each other

      microbes are have mostly low activities in the deep earth

      in summary:
        molecular signatures explain the details 
        Almost immortal
        ....

        methogenesis:
          Microbes using hydrogen as their source of energy, producing methane

Monday January 30th 2023
  - Starting the diversification of the biosphere

  Geologic time:
    subdivided by changes in life caused by mass extinction 
      (Animals respond to the climate system, they undergo large changes in evidence like fossil records)
        FOSSIL RECORDS are a significant piece of information

    Much of life's history, there was single celled organisms

    There really is a phylogenetic tree of life

    Evolution powers our biodiversity

    Adaptation is the key behind evolution -> survival of the fittest

    Evolution is not just a hypothesis, it is an experiemental observation

    Two sides of the evolutionary Process:
      - Origination of new species 

      - Extinction of species 

    There was a strong species diversification during the Cambrian explosion

  Mass Extinction:
    Loss of a lot of life at once

    Increases the rate of evolution

  There has been 5 mass extinctions in our geologic RECORDS

  The largest mass extinctions divide the eras of life



  Comparing the eras:
    Paleozoic: marine dominant 

      Permian Triassic extinction event 252 Ma

    Mesozoic: a lot of dinosaurs

    THIS WILL BE ON THE EXAM
      Creteaceous-Paleogene extinction event 66Ma

    Cenozoic: a lotta mammals


Origination rate: number of new species over time 

Extinction rate: overall loss of species over time

What caused these mass extinctions:
  
  Two leading hypotheses:
    
    Volcanism 

    Impact event

  Volcanism definition:
    Large and rapid release of lava to earth's surface 

    Formation of a LIP:
      1. Plum forms at core mantle-boundary 

      2. Rises Buoyantly up through mantle 

      3. Plum reaches base of lithosphere, flattens 

      4. Lava erupt to to earth's surface through fissures form "flood basalts"

      Siberian Traps:
        enough lava erupted to cover earth up to 20ft 

        Eruption through an existing coal seem

      There is a strong correlation between LIP and mass extinctions

      Environmental consequnces:
        Co2 -> warming -> oxeanic hypoxia (low oxygen)

February 3rd 2023:
  Evolution of the atmpshere:
    The composition of the atmoshere has changed; 4.5Ga ago we didnt even have an atmosphere

  Volatiles:
    A chemical compound with a relatively low boiling point
      (these are liquids that turn gaseous at room temperature)

    Large atmospheric changes in 3 stages 
    1. Prebiotic - no life, so no oxygen; 
      Volatile degassing from planetary interior
        Volcano degassing or impact degassing

        Mantle volatile degassing is part of planetary differentiation 

        Comets played a key role in providing water to the planets. Isotope ratio of oceans is similar to that of Comets

        oldest mineral known on earth has evidence of liquid H20 

        Origin of life - major factor in subsequent changes in atmospheric composition

    2. Biotic - pre oxygen
      at the time of origin of life, oxygen was a toxin

      the primary forms of life before oxygen was METHANOGENSIS -> anoxygenic photosynthesis

      Methane is a byproduct 

      Early atmosphere was concentrated with methane

    3. Biotic - oxygenated 
      Cyanobacteria evolution, performing photosynthesis where oxygen is a byproduct

      The great oxidation event occured 2.4Ga years ago !!!

      The real question is: how did we know this happened... USING MINERALS AND ROCKS AS INDICATORS

    REDOX REACTIONS:
      
      The GOE (great oxidation event) changed earth's surface chemistry

      This was facilitated by redox reactions because more oxygen led to a more oxidized environment

      - interior of earth is reduced
      - hydrothermal vents but Fe(II) in ocean 
      - early ocean was anoxic 
      - oxygen in surface ocean goes and oxidates stuff

    Banded iron formations:
      Red areas indicate a point of time where the rocks became very oxygenated (rust)
      the black bands indicated no redox reactions occured

      Decrease in methane and Co2, as a result of increased Co2 
        Co2: buried in ROCKS
        methane: short life time in the atmpshere

      Summary:
        Prebiotic - 4.5-3.8 Ga 
        Biotic - preoxygenated 3.8 - 2.5 Ga
        Biotic - oxygenated 2.5Ga - present

        Have 300x as much carbon than oxygen

        The ratio of carbon to oxygen is 1:1


    LIFE's BATTERY
      We have a biosphere and oxygen 

      Surface oxidations takes a lot of oxygen, the biosphere, however, removes carbon through getting buried in sediment
      after dying. Oxygen is always there, but life is continously removing carbon 


