Goal and thoughts on my time in higher education so far (Tuesday October 11th, 2022):

    If I were to think of my all time goal, after spending so much time academia, my top priority would be to become a smart person. At my current state, im
    definitely just a little high school graduate--who worked his way through IB diploma and everything IB; I am currently incomplete. My time through higher
    eeducation has splendid. I met so many people - I found people I love hanging around with: huy, bernardo, the rest of digadam, and I'll likely meet some more 
    people in the near future.  I dont hope to become a genius I once hoped to be, I just hope to push the boundaries I have imposed on myself.

    I do not know how far I can go, so I will go as far as I can - whatever it takes. There is so much I don't know, and yet, so much I want to know. I love that.
Feb 19th, Sunday 

I started feeling emotions for the first time in a while. Its both overwhelming and really cool. Also, I kinda just realized that being self deprecating is just
cringe lmao. I've started to feel more comfortable with myself 


Feb 21st, Tuesday 2023
  The whole nicole thing kinda blew up in my face. however, im really glad I opened my heart out to the world again. My heart will stay open.
  Im also finding more reasons to live on this strangely habital planet. I realize that my goal in life isn't to be a smart person.
  That shit is gonna inflate my ego like it did in highschool. My goal is to be better. Just like  in any game or skill, you gotta keep grinding.
  Attaining happiness is also a grind and it also takes spirtuality. I'm finding meaning in my life. I love listening to music and playing awesome 
  video games. I love hanging out with my friends. I hope to develop myself more and come to a point where I dont need to depend on my success to be 
  happy. I want to love who I am. 

  Who are you?
    I am Raed Kabir, a first-year college student who is interested in computer science and healthcare. I am currently leaning torwards being an M.D. but yeah.
    I love to learn new things and continuously challenge myself.

  What do you want?
    I want to continue to push my boundaries; I want to never be in a state of complacency of my abillity as a scholar or an individual. Going as far as I can,
    while also being healthy to myself. I want to love who I am, never thinking im a loser like in highschool. I am me, and I want to believe that because I
    am me, I am valuable to the world and people around me. I want to tell myself "We all matter to someone, so we'd love to have you stick around." I want to 
    feel like I am loved, but first, I cant just recieve that externally. I must also supply love to myself to be sustainable in a relationship with someone else
    At the same time, you are already loved my your family and friends. So, what is there is to sad about? 

    I think im depressed because of my personal expectations on myself, I want to be happy, so ill continusouly work torwards that. no matter what it takes

  Why do we fall? So we can learn to pick ourselves up 

  May you be happy, Raed. Because you deserve it dude. Stop being so hard on yourself. No one needs a reason to be kind to themselves - you cant 
  just determine your self worth like that. I respect your never-ending fire, a drive that you run on. Its taking you so far but remember your health is 
  also extremely important. Being succesful while also being healthy is hard to maintain, but you gotta learn how. Seek therapy and strive to be better. Your 
  mind is sick. Heal up and get get back out there: be you.

Feb 22nd, Wednesday 
I was really fucking petty yesterday. I be trying to rizz but then I do really stupid shit by being loud and preteneding not to 
notice her. We'll see what happens. Really want to hang out with this person, but yeah this fuck up may actually be the death of
this friendship? When I see her again, I will approach her. Also carson today mentioned that liking someone isnt a big deal, Really
Actually, now that I think about it, I dont think nicole really cared or noticed. Im digging a grave for myself again I think. 
Really want to see her again and hope she texts back. 心を燃やせ！






































Flash forward to today: march 16th 2023:
  I started dating ella. I actually love her, so much so that whenever she feels anxious, I start feeling anxious. The empathy is to the point where I feel whatever 
  she is feeling. The other day, ella told me--while high--that she is anorexic. she struggled with her eating disorder since 6th grade. Also, ella was sexually
  assaulted. As in, she was raped by her ex boyfriend. I was completely shocked by this fact. She was surprised I respected her boundaries while making out. I found this 
  really 
